GH-34252: [Java] Support ScannerBuilder::Project or ScannerBuilder::Filter as a Substrait proto extended expression (#35570)
apache/arrow: docs/source/java/substrait.rst

    0	ALGERIA	0	 haggle. carefully final deposits detect slyly agai
    1	ARGENTINA	1	al foxes promise slyly according to the regular accounts. bold requests alon

Executing Projections and Filters Using Extended Expressions
============================================================

> Dataset also supports projections and filters with Substrait's extended expressions.

Reviewer: Link to what this means

    import io.substrait.proto.SimpleExtensionURI;
    import io.substrait.type.NamedStruct;
    import io.substrait.type.Type;
    import io.substrait.type.TypeCreator;
    import io.substrait.type.proto.TypeProtoConverter;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileFormat;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileSystemDatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.jni.NativeMemoryPool;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.ScanOptions;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.Scanner;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.Dataset;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.BufferAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.ipc.ArrowReader;

    import java.nio.ByteBuffer;
    import java.util.ArrayList;
    import java.util.Arrays;
    import java.util.Base64;
    import java.util.HashMap;
    import java.util.List;
    import java.util.Optional;

    public class ClientSubstraitExtendedExpressions {
        public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
            // create extended expression for: project two new columns + one filter

>             ByteBuffer binaryExtendedExpressions = createExtendedExpresionMessageUsingPOJOClasses();

Reviewer: There is no reason to be so verbose

Reviewer: Long method names hurt clarity in the docs where the width is limited

Author: changed

            // project and filter dataset using extended expression definition - 03 Expressions:
            // Expression 01 - CONCAT: N_NAME || ' - ' || N_COMMENT = col 1 || ' - ' || col 3
            // Expression 02 - ADD: N_REGIONKEY + 10 = col 1 + 10
            // Expression 03 - FILTER: N_NATIONKEY > 18 = col 3 > 18
            projectAndFilterDataset(binaryExtendedExpressions);
        }

        public static void projectAndFilterDataset(ByteBuffer binaryExtendedExpressions) {

>             String uri = "file:////Users/dsusanibar/voltron/fork/consumer-testing/tests/data/tpch_parquet/nation.parquet";

Reviewer: Try not to put our company name in strings?

Author: changed

    0	ALGERIA	0	 haggle. carefully final deposits detect slyly agai
    1	ARGENTINA	1	al foxes promise slyly according to the regular accounts. bold requests alon

Executing Projections and Filters Using Extended Expressions
============================================================

> Using `Extended Expression`_ we could leverage our current Dataset operations to
> also support Projections and Filters by. To gain access to Projections and Filters
> is needed to define that operations using current Extended Expression Java POJO
> classes defined into `Substrait Java`_ project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dataset also supports projections and filters with Substrait's extended expressions.
This requires the substrait-java library.
```

> Here is an example of a Java program that queries a Parquet file to project new
> columns and also filter then based on Extended Expression definitions. This example
> show us:
> 
> - Load TPCH parquet file Nation.parquet.
> - Produce new Projections and apply Filter into dataset using extended expression definition.
>     - Expression 01 - CONCAT: N_NAME || ' - ' || N_COMMENT = col 1 || ' - ' || col 3.
>     - Expression 02 - ADD: N_REGIONKEY + 10 = col 1 + 10.
>     - Expression 03 - FILTER: N_NATIONKEY > 18 = col 3 > 18.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This Java program:

- Loads a Parquet file containing the "nation" table from the TPC-H benchmark.
- Projects two new columns:
    - ``N_NAME || ' - ' || N_COMMENT``
    - ``N_REGIONKEY + 10``
- Applies a filter: ``N_NATIONKEY > 18``
```

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.jni.NativeMemoryPool;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.ScanOptions;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.Scanner;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.Dataset;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.BufferAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.ipc.ArrowReader;

    import com.google.protobuf.InvalidProtocolBufferException;
    import com.google.protobuf.util.JsonFormat;

    import io.substrait.proto.Expression;
    import io.substrait.proto.ExpressionReference;
    import io.substrait.proto.ExtendedExpression;
    import io.substrait.proto.FunctionArgument;
    import io.substrait.proto.SimpleExtensionDeclaration;
    import io.substrait.proto.SimpleExtensionURI;
    import io.substrait.type.NamedStruct;
    import io.substrait.type.Type;
    import io.substrait.type.TypeCreator;
    import io.substrait.type.proto.TypeProtoConverter;

    public class ClientSubstraitExtendedExpressions {
      public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {

>         // create extended expression for: project two new columns + one filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>         String binaryExtendedExpressions = createExtendedExpresionMessageUsingPOJOClasses();

Reviewer: Um, why use a String? Just pass it around as a ByteBuffer in the first place.

Author: Changed

>         // project and filter dataset using extended expression definition - 03 Expressions:
>         // Expression 01 - CONCAT: N_NAME || ' - ' || N_COMMENT = col 1 || ' - ' || col 3
>         // Expression 02 - ADD: N_REGIONKEY + 10 = col 1 + 10
>         // Expression 03 - FILTER: N_NATIONKEY > 18 = col 3 > 18

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

            .build();
        SimpleExtensionDeclaration extensionFunctionLowerThan = SimpleExtensionDeclaration.newBuilder()
            .setExtensionFunction(
                SimpleExtensionDeclaration.ExtensionFunction.newBuilder()
                    .setFunctionAnchor(2)
                    .setName("gt:any_any")
                    .setExtensionUriReference(2))
            .build();
        extensions.add(extensionFunctionAdd);
        extensions.add(extensionFunctionGreaterThan);
        extensions.add(extensionFunctionLowerThan);

        // Extended Expression
        ExtendedExpression.Builder extendedExpressionBuilder =
            ExtendedExpression.newBuilder().
                addReferredExpr(0,
                    expressionReferenceBuilderProjectOne).
                addReferredExpr(1,
                    expressionReferenceBuilderProjectTwo).
                addReferredExpr(2,
                    expressionReferenceBuilderFilterOne).
                setBaseSchema(of.toProto());
        extendedExpressionBuilder.addAllExtensionUris(extensionUris.values());
        extendedExpressionBuilder.addAllExtensions(extensions);

>         ExtendedExpression extendedExpression = extendedExpressionBuilder.build();

Reviewer: How stable is this? If the format is likely to change then I wonder if it's worth having so much code that might get stale quickly

        // Print JSON
        System.out.println(
            JsonFormat.printer().includingDefaultValueFields().print(
                extendedExpression));
        // Print binary representation
        System.out.println(Base64.getEncoder().encodeToString(

>             extendedExpression.toByteArray()));

Reviewer: ...there's not really much point printing this

Author: Deleted

        public static void projectAndFilterDataset() {
            String uri = "file:///Users/data/tpch_parquet/nation.parquet";
            ScanOptions options = new ScanOptions.Builder(/*batchSize*/ 32768)
                    .columns(Optional.empty())
                    .substraitFilter(getSubstraitExpressionFilter())
                    .substraitProjection(getSubstraitExpressionProjection())
                    .build();
            try (
                    BufferAllocator allocator = new RootAllocator();
                    DatasetFactory datasetFactory = new FileSystemDatasetFactory(
                            allocator, NativeMemoryPool.getDefault(),
                            FileFormat.PARQUET, uri);
                    Dataset dataset = datasetFactory.finish();
                    Scanner scanner = dataset.newScan(options);
                    ArrowReader reader = scanner.scanBatches()
            ) {
                while (reader.loadNextBatch()) {
                    System.out.println(
                            reader.getVectorSchemaRoot().contentToTSVString());
                }
            } catch (Exception e) {
                e.printStackTrace();

>             }

Reviewer: just declare everything as `throws Exception`

Author: added

        }

        private static ByteBuffer getSubstraitExpressionProjection() {
            // Expression: N_REGIONKEY + 10 = col 3 + 10
            Expression.Builder selectionBuilderProjectOne = Expression.newBuilder().
                    setSelection(
                            Expression.FieldReference.newBuilder().
                                    setDirectReference(
                                            Expression.ReferenceSegment.newBuilder().
                                                    setStructField(
                                                            Expression.ReferenceSegment.StructField.newBuilder().setField(
                                                                    2)
                                                    )
                                    )

>                     );

Reviewer: nit: how are you formatting examples? I think it would make sense to just use `google-java-format` which has a more compact style. In our docs, going too far to the right is unreadable.

Author: changed

    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileFormat;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.file.FileSystemDatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.jni.NativeMemoryPool;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.ScanOptions;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.scanner.Scanner;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.Dataset;
    import org.apache.arrow.dataset.source.DatasetFactory;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.BufferAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.memory.RootAllocator;
    import org.apache.arrow.vector.ipc.ArrowReader;

    public class ClientSubstraitExtendedExpressionsCookbook {

      public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        // project and filter dataset using extended expression definition - 03 Expressions:
        // Expression 01 - CONCAT: N_NAME || ' - ' || N_COMMENT = col 1 || ' - ' || col 3
        // Expression 02 - ADD: N_REGIONKEY + 10 = col 1 + 10
        // Expression 03 - FILTER: N_NATIONKEY > 18 = col 3 > 18
        projectAndFilterDataset();
      }

      public static void projectAndFilterDataset() {
        //String uri = "file:///Users/dsusanibar/data/tpch_parquet/nation.parquet";

>         String uri = "file:////Users/dsusanibar/voltron/fork/consumer-testing/tests/data/tpch_parquet/nation.parquet";

Reviewer: Can we not put company names in strings? And remove the redundant comment.

Author: Sorry, second time same error

Author: Just updated
